docs: add Policy lifecycle RFC (#44)
kubewarden/rfc: rfc/0022-policy-lifecycle.md

- Policy validation: The Policy Server will validate the policy before loading it, ensuring that it is correctly compiled and can be loaded.
- Policy status monitoring: The Policy Server will report the status of the policy, indicating whether it was loaded successfully or if an error occurred.
- Policy versioning: The Policy Server will keep running with a previous version of the policy in case of issues with the latest policy.
- Policy rollback: The user will be able to rollback to a previous policy version in case of issues with the latest policy.

## Examples / User Stories

[examples]: #examples

- As a user, I want to load a new policy/update an existing policy without requiring a restart of the policy server.
- As a user, I want to know if a policy was pulled or validated successfully.
- As a user, I want to monitor the status of a policy on specific policy server replica so that I can identify and resolve issues with the policy.
- As a user, I want that the policy server keeps running with a previous version of the policy in case of issues with the latest policy.
- As a user, I want to rollback to a previous policy version in case of issues with the latest policy.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- As a user, I want to be able to debug what is wrong with namespaced policies that I own without having to bother the administrator of the cluster

```

# Detailed design

[design]: #detailed-design

## Concepts

To implemenet the new policy lifecycle, we will introduce the following concepts:

### The Policy Server acts as a controller

At the time of writing the Policy Server is configured with a ConfigMap that contains all the policies to be loaded.
When a new policy is created, the ConfigMap is updated, and the Policy Server is restarted to load the new policy.

We want to change this behavior to allow the Policy Server to act as a controller that can load new policies without requiring a restart.
The Policy Server will be watching the Policy CRD directly and it will change the internal state of the evaluation environment when a new policy is created or updated.

> A leader election mechanism will be implemented to ensure that only one Policy Server instance is acting as a controller at a time.

Author: how do we plan to implement the leader election mechanism?

Reviewer: We will rely on what the [Kubernetes Leases](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/leases/) to do that. This is the same mechanism used by the controllers scaffolded by kube-builder to elect a leader.

Since Poliy Server is written in Rust, we will have to rely on [kubert's lease module](https://docs.rs/kubert/0.22.0/kubert/lease/index.html). These features are not provided by the `kube` crate. However `kubert` is built on top of `kube`, is actively maintained and is used in production by linkerd

The leader will be responsible to pull the policies from the registry, validate the policy settings, precompile the policy and store it in a shared cache.
After the policy is precompiled, the leader will change the status of the policy to Valid and signal the other replicas that a new policy is available to be loaded.
The replicas will be watching the Policy CRDs and load the new policy when the status is `Valid`.
In case of an error, the policy status will be updated, but the Policy Server will continue serving the previous valid policy until the issue is resolved.

> ### Shared Policy Cache

Author: what is a cache? mention wasmtime precompiled modules and backward compatibility.

Reviewer: Some notes to be added.

We will load the module and precompile it using [`wasmtime::Engine::precompile_module`](https://docs.rs/wasmtime/latest/wasmtime/struct.Engine.html#method.precompile_module). We will then save the binary blob to disk.

The wasmtime `Module` can then loaded by the non-leader instances using the [`wasmtime::Module::deserialize_file`](https://docs.rs/wasmtime/latest/wasmtime/struct.Module.html#method.deserialize_file).

## Limitations

### Compatibility of precompiled modules

A precompiled module can be successfully reused by another `wasmtime::Engine` only if the following conditions are satisfied:

- The same version of wasmtime is used both by the "optimizer" and by the end consumer
- The same `wasmtime::Config` was used both by the "optimizer" and by the end consumer. For example, if we enable [async support](https://docs.rs/wasmtime/latest/wasmtime/struct.Config.html#method.async_support) (we plan to do that soon) or [epoch interruption](https://docs.rs/wasmtime/latest/wasmtime/struct.Config.html#method.epoch_interruption) (we use that to implement the timeout protection feature) on the consumer side, but the "optimizer" did not have them enabled at compilation time, there will be an error.

This is documented [here](https://docs.rs/wasmtime/latest/wasmtime/struct.Module.html#method.deserialize):

> Note that this function is designed to be safe receiving output from any compiled version of wasmtime itself. This means that it is safe to feed output from older versions of Wasmtime into this function, in addition to newer versions of wasmtime (from the future!). These inputs will deterministically and safely produce an Err. This function only successfully accepts inputs from the same version of wasmtime, but the safety guarantee only applies to externally-defined blobs of bytes, not those defined by any version of wasmtime. (this means that if you cache blobs across versions of wasmtime you can be safely guaranteed that future versions of wasmtime will reject old cache entries).

We can rely on Wasmtime producing an error when we attempt to load an incompatible version of an optimized module (and then just handle that gracefully by downloading and optimizing the module on "our own").
Otherwise, we could save some metadata next to the binary blob, containing the details about the version of wasmtime used and the configuration in place. wasmtime has some built-in mechanism to keep track of its own version when handling modules: see [here](https://docs.rs/wasmtime/latest/wasmtime/struct.Config.html#method.module_version).

### Security implications

Loading the precompiled binary blob from the shared cache can expose to a attacks. An attacker could replace the binary blob with another one that, while being valid, is doing something completely different. Basically, we could allow arbitrary code to run.

We can eliminate this risk by using Sigstore signing capability (with simple private keys, no fulcio/rekor involvement) to sign and verify all these binary blobs.
We could leverage the already existing internal CA of Kubewarden to generate a certificate and a key that can be used by the leader to sign the blobs.

The Policy Server will have a shared cache where the precompiled policies will be stored.

> We can use a RWX Persistent Volume to store the cache and share it among all the Policy Server replicas.

Author: elaborate more on the RWX Persistent Volume and what are the requirements to use it

### Policy Versioning

We can use the `generation` field of the Policy CRD to version policies. When a new policy is created or updated, Kubernetes automatically increments the `generation` field.

> The current policy will be stored in another CRD, similar to the `Policy` CRD, but with a different name, such as `PolicyReplica`.

Reviewer: Naming is hard. I think Replica is not super helpful, what about `PolicyInstance`?

I fear we would have to introduce these lower-level resources for every policy-related CRD we have:

- `AdmissionPolicy`: `AdmissionPolicyInstance`
- `ClusterAdmissionPolicy`: `ClusterAdmissionPolicyInstance`
- `AdmissionPolicyGroup`: `AdmissionPolicyGroupInstance`
- `ClusterAdmissionPolicyGroup`: `ClusterAdmissionPolicyGroupInstance`

Only one `PolicyReplica` will be kept at any time. When a Policy Server replica restarts or a new replica is created, it will load the policy from the `PolicyReplica` CRD.

The `PolicyReplica` is always assumed to be valid, as it has already been validated by the leader.
If a Policy Server replica fails to load the policy from the `PolicyReplica` CRD, it will exit with an error.
Since Kubernetes removes the pod from the service endpoints during a restart or a termination, the Policy Server service will remain consistent, ensuring that no server operates without a valid policy.

Additionally, the policy validation endpoint will include the `generation` number in its URL.
When all Policy Server replicas are ready with the new `PolicyReplica`, the validation endpoint will switch to the new `generation` number.
Once this transition is complete, the `PolicyReplica` (current state) and the `Policy` (desired state) will be identical, ensuring consistency across all Policy Server replicas.

> This approach guarantees that the Policy Server will always have a valid policy to load and avoids any service interruptions during updates.

Reviewer: I'm fine with that, I think it's nice. However, I think we need to have more than 1 `PolicyInstance` object per Policy.

Ideally we would need 2 objects. The `PolicyInstance` would have a boolean field `active` and only the ones with `active == true` are going to be served by the Policy Servers.

Let's go through a timeline of events (which is something we should also make part of the RFC):

- User creates a `AdmissionPolicy`
- The leader of the Policy Servers notices that, downloads, optimize and verify the policy.
- The leader creates a `AdmissionPolicyInstance` object with `gen: 1` and `active: true`
- All the policy servers expose the policy as `/validate/<id of the policy>/g1`
- The webhook is created and points to `/validate/<id of the policy>/g1`

The user makes a change to the previously created policy:
- The leader notices the change, downloads, optimizes and verifies the policy
- The leader creates a new `AdmissionPolicyInstance` with `g2` and `active: true`
- All the policy servers expose the new instance of the policy as `/validate/<id of the policy>/g2`. The `/validate/<id of the policy>/g1` is still active
- The kubewarden controller monitors the rollout of the g2 version of the policy. Once this is available on all the instances it updates `AdmissionPolicyInstance(g1)` to have `active: false`
- The policy servers notice the change stop serving the `g1` policy

The user can eventually do a rollback, but this is something we need to think more about...

Thinking more about that, we might not even need the `active

### The Policy Server is a StatefulSet

> The Policy Server will be deployed as a StatefulSet to ensure that each replica has a unique identity.

Author: What is the tradeoff moving away from the Deployment?

Author: this was documented in the policy server lifecycle section below

| The leader successfully pulls the policy from the registry, validates the settings, precompiles the policy, and stores it in the shared cache.                              | `Valid`                      |
| The leader encounters an error while loading the policy. The status is set to `Invalid`, and the webhook will not be configured.                                            | `Invalid`                    |
| The leader fails to retrieve the policy from the registry. The status is set to `PullError`, and the webhook will not be configured.                                        | `PullError`                  |
| The Policy Server replica successfully loads the policy and updates the status to `Ready` with the replica number. The webhook can then be configured.                      | `Ready (replica number)`     |
| The controller configures the webhook to validate the policy. The status is updated to indicate the policy generation being served, which includes the `generation` number. | `Active (generation number)` |

NOTE: If there is a failure during an update, the Policy Server will keep running with the previous valid policy.

> 

Author: How does this simplify the main controller code?

When all Policy Server replicas are ready with the new `PolicyReplica`, the validation endpoint will switch to the new `generation` number.
Once this transition is complete, the `PolicyReplica` (current state) and the `Policy` (desired state) will be identical, ensuring consistency across all Policy Server replicas.
This approach guarantees that the Policy Server will always have a valid policy to load and avoids any service interruptions during updates.

### The Policy Server is a StatefulSet

The Policy Server will be deployed as a StatefulSet to ensure that each replica has a unique identity.
This will allow us to identify the status of a policy on a specific Policy Server replica.

### Policy Status

The Policy CRD status will be updated to support the following Status Conditions:

From the leader perspective:

- `Pending`: The leader has received the event and is starting the policy loading process.
- `Valid`: The policy was successfully loaded and is ready to be used.
- `Invalid`: The policy failed to load due to an error with the policy settings.
- `PullError`: The leader failed to pull the policy from the registry.

> - `Pending`: The policy is being loaded.

Author: fix this

| **replica** (optional) | The replica number reporting the status.                                                            |

The `Policy` CRD and the `PolicyRevision` CRD will be updated to include the status conditions.
See the [Policy and PolicyRevision conditions](#policy-and-policyrevision-conditions) section for more details on how the status conditions will be propagated.

The following `PolicyConditions` will be observed:

- `Scheduled`: The policy was created and is pending to be loaded.
- `Initialized`: The policy was successfully pulled, precompiled and validated by the leader.
- `Ready`: The policy was successfully loaded and is ready to be used. This status will include the replica number.

By using the `reason` field in the status condition, we can provide detailed information in case of an error.
For instance if the leader fails to initialize a policy because of registry error, the following status condition will be set:

```yaml
conditions:
  - type: Initialized
    status: False
    reason: PullError
    message: "Cannot pull the policy from the registry."
```

### Rollback

> If a policy fails to load, the Policy Server will keep running with the previous valid policy.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we can inform the user of this. As it stands, users would need to look at the policy status + generation number, which isn't ergonomic. Maybe we could add a `ReadyButOld` status if the generation is not the last possible.

> If a policy fails to load, the Policy Server will keep running with the previous valid policy.

Reviewer 2: It would be nice if we can signify the user of this case, so they don't need to look at the ready + generation number.

Maybe adding another condition besides Ready, such as `ReadyButOld`, with reason being `generation-22` for example.

Reviewer: I would try to leave the conditions as simple as possible, and then build some logic that uses them to provide meaningful information to the end users.

kubectl gives some control about how the data is shown to the user, but I don't know if we would have enough freedom to implement what I've described.

We could also create a kubewarden kubectl plugin for that. This could also be used to implement subcommands like "rollback" for our policies. AFAIK we cannot extend `kubectl rollback` to handle also our resources.

Author: @viccuad, there's another approach used by Pod resources that we could adopt. We could introduce a [`status.phase`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/pod-lifecycle/#pod-phase) field alongside `status.conditions` to provide a high-level summary of the Policy's lifecycle stage. For example, the phase could include values like `Pending`, `Initializing`, `Active`, `Failed`, or `Updating`, while still displaying a detailed summary of the conditions, such as `Ready 2/3`.

Author: Added `phase` in https://github.com/kubewarden/rfc/pull/44/commits/5407d80b73a5a533c02ebf8865763fabc42b92df

The user will be able to rollback to a previous policy version by updating the `Policy` CRD (via a spec field or an annotation, TBD).

> The controller will detect the change and use the `PolicyRevision` CRD to update the Policy CRD with the previous configuration.

Reviewer 3: Why do the user needs to change a version filed in the CRD? If the `Policy` CRD define the desired state, shouldn't  users just reapply the new state and see if policy server is able to load it? What happen if the user change the `Policy` CRD version field and something else (e.g. settings) ?

Reviewer: I think doing a rollback is something tricky. What is described here is not what I would do.

Assuming we want to rollback from generation 2 to generation 1.
We take contents of the `PolicyRevision(g1).spec.data` and copy it back to the `Policy.spec`.

I think we could do a rollback with the set of CRDs described by this RFC. What we have to figure out is if it makes sense to offer this functionality and what the UX would be. I consider that not something to be part of this RFC

   It also sets the `policyGeneration` field to the value of `metadata.generation` from the `Policy` CRD and adds the `Scheduled` status condition to both the `Policy` and `PolicyRevision` CRDs.
3. The new `PolicyRevision` triggers the leader reconciler. The leader pulls the policy from the registry, precompiles the policy, and stores it in the shared cache.
4. The leader validates the policy settings.
5. The leader changes the status condition of type `Initialized` of the `PolicyRevision` to `True`.
   - If an error occurred in the previous steps, the status condition of type `Initialized` will be set to `False` with the appropriate reason and message.
6. The controller propagates the status condition to the `Policy` CRD.
7. The replica reconciler of all the replicas including the leader loads the policy in the evaluation environment.
8. Every replica will report the status of the policy to the `PolicyRevision` CRD, setting the status condition of type `Ready` to `True`.
   - If an error occurs, the status condition of type `Ready` will be set to `False` with the appropriate reason and message.
9. The `Ready` status is propagated to the `Policy` CRD.

> 10. When all the replicas have set the `Ready` status to true, the controller creates a Webhook configuration with the `generation` query parameter set to the `PolicyRevision` generation.

Reviewer 3: If we will update the webhooks only after all the replicas as ready, why do we need to have the generation in the path? On each case the old revision will be used? Is this necessary because the RFC expect to have a revision field in the `Policy` CRD?

Author: The goal is to continue serving the old policy until the new one is fully ready. Without including the generation in the path, any errors in loading the new policy by some replicas would prevent a proper rollout. In the current implementation, the policy remains marked as active because the old version was active, even if the new policy contains errors and the pod is in a CrashLoopBackoff state.

> 1. The user creates a new `Policy`.
> 2. The controller creates a new `PolicyRevision` resource with the policy content and sets the `enabled` field to `true`.
>    It also sets the `policyGeneration` field to the value of `metadata.generation` from the `Policy` CRD and adds the `Scheduled` status condition to both the `Policy` and `PolicyRevision` CRDs.
> 3. The new `PolicyRevision` triggers the leader reconciler. The leader pulls the policy from the registry, precompiles the policy, and stores it in the shared cache.
> 4. The leader validates the policy settings.
> 5. The leader changes the status condition of type `Initialized` of the `PolicyRevision` to `True`.
>    - If an error occurred in the previous steps, the status condition of type `Initialized` will be set to `False` with the appropriate reason and message.
> 6. The controller propagates the status condition to the `Policy` CRD.
> 7. The replica reconciler of all the replicas including the leader loads the policy in the evaluation environment.
> 8. Every replica will report the status of the policy to the `PolicyRevision` CRD, setting the status condition of type `Ready` to `True`.
>    - If an error occurs, the status condition of type `Ready` will be set to `False` with the appropriate reason and message.
> 9. The `Ready` status is propagated to the `Policy` CRD.
> 10. When all the replicas have set the `Ready` status to true, the controller creates a Webhook configuration with the `generation` query parameter set to the `PolicyRevision` generation.
> 11. The policy is now ready to be used.

Reviewer 3: As now we have two controllers, I think we need to make which of it we are referring to. Just a suggestion:

```suggestion
1. The user creates a new `Policy`.
2. The Kubewarden controller creates a new `PolicyRevision` resource with the policy content and sets the `enabled` field to `true`.
   It also sets the `policyGeneration` field to the value of `metadata.generation` from the `Policy` CRD and adds the `Scheduled` status condition to both the `Policy` and `PolicyRevision` CRDs.
3. The new `PolicyRevision` triggers the policy server leader reconciler. The policy server leader pulls the policy from the registry, precompiles the policy, and stores it in the shared cache.
4. The policy server leader validates the policy settings.
5. The policy server leader changes the status condition of type `Initialized` of the `PolicyRevision` to `True`.
   - If an error occurred in the previous steps, the status condition of type `Initialized` will be set to `False` with the appropriate reason and message.
6. The Kubewarden controller propagates the status condition to the `Policy` CRD.
7. The replica reconciler of all the replicas including the policy server leader loads the policy in the evaluation environment.
8. Every replica will report the status of the policy to the `PolicyRevision` CRD, setting the status condition of type `Ready` to `True`.
   - If an error occurs, the status condition of type `Ready` will be set to `False` with the appropriate reason and message.
9. The `Ready` status is propagated to the `Policy` CRD.
10. When all the replicas have set the `Ready` status to true, the Kubewarden controller creates a Webhook configuration with the `generation` query parameter set to the `PolicyRevision` generation.
11. The policy is now ready to be used.
```

Reviewer 2: I would also enjoy this clarification please. I thought so far that the policy-server controller would be only for PolicyRevisions.

Author: fixed

|              |                                 |
| :----------- | :------------------------------ |
| Feature Name | [Name]                          |
| Start Date   | [Today]                         |
| Category     | [Category]                      |

> | RFC PR       | [fill this in after opening PR] |

Author: memo to self: fix this

| State        | **ACCEPTED**                    |

# Summary

[summary]: #summary

This RFC introduces a revised policy lifecycle for Kubewarden, enabling users to monitor the status of a policy on a specific Policy Server replica.
The new lifecycle enhances the Policy Server's resilience to failures and facilitates seamless policy updates without requiring server restarts.
Additionally, the user will be able to rollback to a previous policy version in case of issues with the latest policy.

# Motivation

[motivation]: #motivation

This change addresses a critical issue with the Policy Server.
Currently, if a policy fails to load—due to reasons such as an inability to download it from the registry or incorrect settings—the Policy Server exits with an error,

> causing the pod to enter a CrashLoopBackOff state.

Reviewer 4: Shorter sentences for readability.

```suggestion
Currently, a policy can fail to load for a variety of reasons. For example, an inability to download from the registry or incorrect settings. This causes the Policy Server to exit with an error, causing the pod to enter a CrashLoopBackOff state.
```

Resolving this requires inspecting the error messages from the Policy Server pod and fixing the underlying issue.

> However, a user might have the permissions to create a policy but lack the necessary permissions to check the logs of the Policy Server, making it challenging to diagnose and resolve the problem.

Reviewer 4: Shorter sentences.
```suggestion
However, a user might have the permissions to create a policy but lack the necessary permissions to check the logs of the Policy Server. This presents challenges to diagnosis and resolution of problems.
```

Additionally, when updating a policy, there is no status reported to indicate the failure. The policy remains in the Active state even while the Policy Server is stuck in a crash loop.
This creates a significant risk, as new Policy Server pods might fail to start, and the old ones running the previous functional configuration could be lost if their node becomes unavailable.
This situation can disrupt the cluster, as all incoming admission requests will be denied in the absence of operational Policy Server instances.

The proposed changes aim to address these issues by introducing a new policy lifecycle that includes the following features:

- Hot reload of policies: The Policy Server will be able to load a new policy without requiring a restart.

> - Policy validation: The Policy Server will validate the policy before loading it, ensuring that it is correctly compiled and can be loaded.

Reviewer 4: A few less words. Though I'm trying to be very careful with meaning. It is pre-compilation, right?
```suggestion
- Policy validation: The Policy Server will validate the policy before loading it, ensuring correct pre-compilation and loading.
```

> - Policy status monitoring: The Policy Server will report the status of the policy, indicating whether it was loaded successfully or if an error occurred.

Reviewer 4: More concise?
```suggestion
- Policy status monitoring: The Policy Server will report the policy's load status.
```

Author: I prefer to keep the first version, as it highlights the possibility of an error.

- Policy versioning: The Policy Server will keep running with a previous version of the policy in case of issues with the latest policy.
- Policy rollback: The user will be able to rollback to a previous policy version in case of issues with the latest policy.

## Examples / User Stories

[examples]: #examples

> - As a user, I want to load a new policy/update an existing policy without requiring a restart of the policy server.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- As a user, I want to load a new policy or update an existing policy without requiring a restart of the policy server.
```

> - As a user, I want to know if a policy was pulled or validated successfully.

Reviewer 4: Maybe? Or does pulled mean withdrawn, in the case of unsuccessful validation. Anyway I wasn't clear what was meant.
```suggestion
- As a user, I want to know if a policy was downloaded and validated successfully.
```

Author: See https://github.com/kubewarden/rfc/pull/44#discussion_r1914694726

Author: ```suggestion
- As a user, I want to know if a policy was successfully pulled, precompiled, and validated.
```

> - As a user, I want to monitor the status of a policy on specific policy server replica so that I can identify and resolve issues with the policy.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- As a user, I want to monitor the status of a policy on a specific policy server replica so that I can identify and resolve issues with the policy.
```

> - As a user, I want that the policy server keeps running with a previous version of the policy in case of issues with the latest policy.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- As a user, I want the policy server to remain running with a previous version of the policy in case of issues with the latest policy.
```

- As a user, I want to rollback to a previous policy version in case of issues with the latest policy.

> - As a user, I want to debug issues with the namespaced policies I own without needing to involve the cluster administrator.

Reviewer 4: More concise?
```suggestion
- As a user, I want to debug issues with the namespaced policies I own without involving the cluster administrator.
```

# Detailed design

[design]: #detailed-design

> Note: In this RFC, the term `Policy` will be used to refer to any of the following resources: `AdmissionPolicy`, `ClusterAdmissionPolicy`, `AdmissionPolicyGroup`, or `ClusterAdmissionPolicyGroup`.

## Concepts

> To implemenet the new policy lifecycle, we will introduce the following concepts:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To implement the new policy lifecycle, we introduce the following concepts:
```

### Hot reload

The Policy Server will be able to load a new policy without requiring a restart.

> This is will be achieved by refactoring the `EvaluationEnvironment` adding methods to set, update and remove policies.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This will be achieved by refactoring the `EvaluationEnvironment` and adding methods to set, update, and remove policies.
```

### The Policy Server acts as a controller

> At the time of writing the Policy Server is configured with a ConfigMap that contains all the policies to be loaded.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Currently, the Policy Server is configured with a ConfigMap that contains all the policies to be loaded.
```

When a new policy is created, the ConfigMap is updated, and the Policy Server is restarted to load the new policy.

We want to change this behavior to allow the Policy Server to act as a controller that can load new policies without requiring a restart.

#### PolicyRevision CRD

We will introduce a new CRD called `PolicyRevision` to store the state of a policy in relation to the Policy Server replicas.

> `PolicyRevisions` are namespaced resources, and they will be created in the same namespace as the controller.

Reviewer 2: by controller, we mean the policy-server that serves the policies associated to the PolicyRevision, correct?
If not, we need to take care of disambiguating policies that are the same with the same name in different namespaces

Author: we mean the main controller, the kw controller

Author: I will clarify

> The PolicyRevision will include fields to store the policy content and an `enabled` field to specify whether the policy should be served by the Policy Server.

Reviewer 4: To match other uses of PolicyRevision.
```suggestion
The `PolicyRevision` will include fields to store the policy content and an `enabled` field to specify whether the policy should be served by the Policy Server.
```

This approach allows the Policy Server to manage multiple generations of a policy at the same time, facilitating the gradual rollout of updates.

This is similar to the `Deployment` and `ReplicaSet` relationship in Kubernetes, where the `Deployment` defines the desired state at a higher level of abstraction,
and the `ReplicaSet` is responsible for managing the current state to align with this desired state.
Additionally, `ReplicaSets` also store the backup of older `Deployment` revisions, enabling rollback to a previous state if needed.
The `PolicyRevision` will also store the older policy to a maximum of `n` revisions, where `n` is a configurable value.
This will allow users to rollback to a previous policy version if needed.

In summary:

- A `Policy` specifies the desired state of a policy.
- One or more `PolicyRevisions` with `enabled` set to `true` represent the active policies currently served by the Policy Server.
- A `PolicyRevision` with `enabled` set to `true` and `policyGeneration` matching the current generation of the `Policy` represents the desired state of the policy within the Policy Server's evaluation environment.

> - `PolicyRevisions` with `enabled` set to `false` represent previous states of the policies, retained for potential rollback scenarios.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `PolicyRevisions` with `enabled` set to `false` represents previous states of the policies, retained for potential rollback scenarios.
```

> When a new Policy is created, the controller will create a new `PolicyRevision` resource with the policy content and set the `enabled` field to `true`.

Reviewer 2: the controller here means the policy-server, correct? As in, only policy-servers are controllers for Policies and PolicyRevisions?

Author: the controller means the main golang controller. even if the policy server acts as a controller for policy revision, the first creation is made by the kw controller.

  name: clusterwide-privileged-pods-6469c6d5f6 # we will use the Policy unique name and a random suffix
  namespace: kubewarden # the namespace of the controller
  labels:
    kubewarden.io/policy-server: reserved-instance-for-tenant-a # this is needed to filter the PolicyRevisions for a specific PolicyServer
spec:
  objectReference:
    apiVersion: policies.kubewarden.io/v1
    kind: ClusterAdmissionPolicy
    name: privileged-pods
  policyGeneration: 1
  enabled: true
  data: # data will contain the policy.spec contents
    spec:
      policyServer: reserved-instance-for-tenant-a
      module: registry://ghcr.io/kubewarden/policies/pod-privileged:v0.2.2
      rules:
        - apiGroups: [""]
          apiVersions: ["v1"]
          resources: ["pods"]
          operations:
            - CREATE
            - UPDATE
      mutating: false
status:
  conditions:
    - type: Pending
      status: True
      reason: PolicyPending
      message: "The policy was created and is waiting to be loaded"
```

The `PolicyRevision` is comparable to the [`ControllerRevision`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubernetes-api/workload-resources/controller-revision-v1/) resource in Kubernetes.

> The data field is of type `RawExtension`, which allows it to store any type of policy.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The data field is of type `RawExtension`, allowing it to store any policy type.
```

> The Policy Server replicas will be watching the new `PolicyRevision` CRD directly and it will change the internal state of the evaluation environment when a new policy is created or updated.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Policy Server replicas will be monitoring the new `PolicyRevision` CRD directly and will change the internal state of the evaluation environment when a new policy is created or updated.
```

Author: `Watching` is the appropriate term here since the PolicyServer utilizes Kubernetes watches.

We will rely on [Kubernetes Leases](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/leases/) for this functionality, using the same mechanism employed by controllers scaffolded with Kubebuilder to elect a leader.
Since the Policy Server is implemented in Rust, we will use the [kubert](https://docs.rs/kubert/0.22.0/kubert/lease/index.html) crate's lease module for this purpose.
These features are not provided by the `kube-rs` crate, but kubert is built on top of `kube-rs`, is actively maintained, and is used in production by Linkerd.

After the policy is precompiled, the leader will change the status condition of type `Initialized` of the `PolicyRevision` to `True`.
This will trigger the replica reconciler to load the policy in the evaluation environment of all the policy server pods that are part of the StatefulSet.

#### Policy Server replica reconciler

All the replicas, including the leader, will be running a reconciliation loop to configure the policies in the evaluation environment.

> The replicas will be watching the `PolicyRevision` CRDs and load the policy in the evaluation environment when the status condition of type `Initialized` is set to `True` and the `enabled` field is set to `true`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The replicas will monitor the `PolicyRevision` CRDs and load the policy in the evaluation environment when the status condition of type `Initialized` is set to `True` and the `enabled` field is set to `true`.
```

Author: see: https://github.com/kubewarden/rfc/pull/44#discussion_r1914726375

In case of an error, the policy status will be updated, but the Policy Server will continue serving the previous valid policy until the issue is resolved.
This is possible because multiple `PolicyRevisions` can be enabled at the same time.
The Policy Server provides access to current policies through the `/validate` endpoint, incorporating the `generation` number as a URL parameter.
This setup enables the webhook to target a specific policy generation.
For example, the endpoint `/validate/privileged-pods/2` validates requests using the `privileged-pods` policy at generation 2.

#### Policy and PolicyRevision conditions

The `PolicyRevision` CRD will have a status field to store the status of the policy.
The status will be propagated to the `Policy` CRD by the controller, so that the user can monitor the status of the policy without having to access the `PolicyRevision` CRD.

> Being the `PolicyRevision` CRD a namespaced resource, only admin users will have the right permissions to access it.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As the `PolicyRevision` CRD is a namespaced resource, only admin users will have the right permissions to access it.
```

Non-leader instances can later load the precompiled module using [`wasmtime::Module::deserialize_file`](https://docs.rs/wasmtime/latest/wasmtime/struct.Module.html#method.deserialize_file).

#### Limitations: Compatibility of Precompiled Modules

Precompiled modules can only be reused by another `wasmtime::Engine` if the following conditions are met:

1. **Same Wasmtime version**: Both the "optimizer" (the engine that precompiled the module) and the end consumer must use the same version of Wasmtime.
2. **Same Wasmtime configuration**: Both must use the same `wasmtime::Config`. For example, enabling features like [async support](https://docs.rs/wasmtime/latest/wasmtime/struct.Config.html#method.async_support) or [epoch interruption](https://docs.rs/wasmtime/latest/wasmtime/struct.Config.html#method.epoch_interruption) on the consumer side, while the optimizer does not, will result in a loading error.

This is documented [here](https://docs.rs/wasmtime/latest/wasmtime/struct.Module.html#method.deserialize):

> 

Reviewer 4: A general note. Consistency. In a sentence, not at the start, use 'Wasmtime' or 'wasmtime', but not both. I'm not sure which one is preferred or correct.

Author: updated all occurrences to `Wasmtime`

> Note that this function is designed to be safe receiving output from any compiled version of wasmtime itself.
> This means that it is safe to feed output from older versions of Wasmtime into this function, in addition to newer versions of wasmtime (from the future!).
> These inputs will deterministically and safely produce an Err. This function only successfully accepts inputs from the same version of wasmtime,
> but the safety guarantee only applies to externally-defined blobs of bytes, not those defined by any version of wasmtime.
> (this means that if you cache blobs across versions of wasmtime you can be safely guaranteed that future versions of wasmtime will reject old cache entries).

Wasmtime ensures safety by producing an error when an incompatible version of a module is loaded. This allows us to handle such errors gracefully by downloading and re-optimizing the module as needed.
Alternatively, we could save metadata alongside the binary blob containing the version and configuration details. Wasmtime includes mechanisms for version tracking to assist in ensuring compatibility.

> Please refer to the [Wasmtime documentation](https://docs.rs/wasmtime/latest/wasmtime/struct.Config.html#method.module_version) for more information about module versions strategies.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Please refer to the [Wasmtime documentation](https://docs.rs/wasmtime/latest/wasmtime/struct.Config.html#method.module_version) for more information about module version strategies.
```

Therefore, we need to store precompiled modules in a path that includes the Policy Server version.
This ensures compatibility when the Policy Server is updated, and the precompiled modules might no longer work with the new version.
Example: `/cache/ghcr.io/kubewarden/policies/safe-labels/v1.0.0/optimized-kw-v1.28.1.wasm`.

> TODO: explain this example

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Where `v1.0.0` is the policy version and `v1.28.1` the policy-server version.
```

#### Security Implications

Loading precompiled binary blobs from a shared cache introduces potential security risks.
An attacker could replace a valid binary blob with one that runs arbitrary malicious code.

> To mitigate this risk, we will use [sigstore](https://github.com/sigstore)'s signing capabilities to sign and verify all binary blobs.

Reviewer 2: We should ensure this is possible offline to be compatible with airgap. Cosign has offline verification, but needs network for signing (see [here](https://github.com/sigstore/cosign/blob/main/README.md#verify-a-container-in-an-air-gapped-environment)).

> By leveraging Kubewarden's internal certificate authority (CA), we can generate a certificate and private key for the leader to sign blobs, ensuring that only trusted and verified blobs are used.

Reviewer 2: We should ensure this approach works offline for airgap installs by disabling the logs, etc.

Reviewer: The plan is to use traditional keys to sign and verify the modules. No keyless signing is going to be used.
Also, no rekor integration is going to be leveraged.

| ---------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **type**               | Name of the policy condition.                                                                       |
| **status**             | Indicates whether the condition is applicable, with possible values: "True", "False", or "Unknown". |
| **reason**             | Machine-readable reason for the condition's last transition, in UpperCamelCase format.              |
| **message**            | Human-readable message providing details about the last transition.                                 |
| **replica** (optional) | The replica number reporting the status.                                                            |

The `Policy` CRD and the `PolicyRevision` CRD will be updated to include the status conditions.
See the [Policy and PolicyRevision conditions](#policy-and-policyrevision-conditions) section for more details on how the status conditions will be propagated.

The following `PolicyConditions` will be observed:

- `Scheduled`: The policy was created and is pending to be loaded.

> - `Initialized`: The policy was successfully pulled, precompiled and validated by the leader.

Reviewer 4: Pulled or downloaded again. I would prefer downloaded if that's what meant. I think it's clearer in this context

Author: @jhkrug I’m considering switching everything to "pulled" since "pulling" is the term commonly used when referring to OCI registries.

3. The new `PolicyRevision` triggers the leader reconciler. The leader pulls the policy from the registry, precompiles the policy, and stores it in the shared cache.
4. The leader validates the policy settings.
5. The leader changes the status condition of type `Initialized` of the `PolicyRevision` to `True`.
   - If an error occurred in the previous steps, the status condition of type `Initialized` will be set to `False` with the appropriate reason and message.
6. The controller propagates the status condition to the `Policy` CRD.
7. The replica reconciler of all the replicas including the leader loads the policy in the evaluation environment.
8. Every replica will report the status of the policy to the `PolicyRevision` CRD, setting the status condition of type `Ready` to `True`.
   - If an error occurs, the status condition of type `Ready` will be set to `False` with the appropriate reason and message.
9. The `Ready` status is propagated to the `Policy` CRD.
10. When all the replicas have set the `Ready` status to true, the controller creates a Webhook configuration with the `generation` query parameter set to the `PolicyRevision` generation.

> 11. The policy is now read to be used.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
11. The policy is now ready to be used.
```

   It also sets the `policyGeneration` field to the value of `metadata.generation` from the `Policy` object and adds the `Scheduled` status condition to both the `Policy` and `PolicyRevision` CRDs.
3. The new `PolicyRevision` triggers the leader reconciler. The leader pulls the policy from the registry, precompiles the policy, and stores it in the shared cache.
4. The leader validates the policy settings.
5. The leader changes the status condition of type `Initialized` of the `PolicyRevision` to `True`.
   - If an error occurred in the previous steps, the status condition of type `Initialized` will be set to `False` with the appropriate reason and message.
6. The controller propagates the status condition to the `Policy` CRD.
7. The replica reconciler of all the replicas including the leader loads the policy in the evaluation environment.
8. Every replica will report the status of the policy to the `PolicyRevision` CRD, setting the status condition of type `Ready` to `True`.
   - If an error occurs, the status condition of type `Ready` will be set to `False` with the appropriate reason and message.
9. The `Ready` status is propagated to the `Policy` CRD.

> 10. When all the replicas have set the `Ready` status to true, the controller creates updateds the Webhook configuration with the `generation` query parameter set to the `PolicyRevision` generation.

Reviewer 4: Maybe?
```suggestion
10. When all the replicas have set the `Ready` status to true, the controller creates or updates the Webhook configuration with the `generation` query parameter set to the `PolicyRevision` generation.
```

    - If an error occurred in the previous steps, the controller will not update the Webhook configuration.
11. The controller garbage collects the old `PolicyRevisions` and precompiled modules, keeping only the last `n` revisions.

> 12. The policy is now read to be used.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
12. The policy is now ready to be used.
```

   - If an error occurred in the previous steps, the status condition of type `Initialized` will be set to `False` with the appropriate reason and message.
8. The controller propagates the status condition to the `Policy` CRD.
9. The replica reconciler of all the replicas including the leader loads the policy in the evaluation environment.
10. Every replica will report the status of the policy to the `PolicyRevision` CRD, setting the status condition of type `Ready` to `True`.
    - If an error occurs, the status condition of type `Ready` will be set to `False` with the appropriate reason and message.
11. The `Ready` status is propagated to the `Policy` CRD.
12. When all the replicas have set the `Ready` status to true, the controller creates a Webhook configuration pointing to the `PolicyRevision` generation.
    - If an error occurred in the previous steps, the controller will not update the Webhook configuration.
13. The policy is now ready to be used.

### Policy Update

1. The user updates an existing `Policy`.
2. The controller creates a new `PolicyRevision` resource with the policy content and sets the `enabled` field to `true`.

>    It also sets the `policyGeneration` field to the value of `metadata.generation` from the `Policy` object and adds the `Scheduled` status condition set to `False` to both the `Policy` and `PolicyRevision` CRDs.

Reviewer: Maybe it could also add an event to Policy stating that the policy is being upgraded

Author: Are you referring to Kubernetes events? [Does this section clarify the purpose of generating events sufficiently?](https://github.com/kubewarden/rfc/blob/c3d4d1e88f3fc837e1e16dfe0356b596d14a4c3d/rfc/0022-policy-lifecycle.md?plain=1#L288)

Reviewer: yes, I was referring to events. I think the linked section is good enough. Closing

We will introduce a new CRD called `PolicyRevision` to store the state of a policy in relation to the Policy Server replicas.
`PolicyRevisions` are namespaced resources, and they will be created in the same namespace as the Kubewarden controller.

The `PolicyRevision` will include fields to store the policy content and an `enabled` field to specify whether the policy should be served by the Policy Server.
The `PolicyRevision` will include a `policyGeneration` field to store the generation of the associated `Policy`.
This field will be set to the value of `metadata.generation` from the `Policy` CRD at the time the `PolicyRevision` is created.
This approach allows the Policy Server to manage multiple generations of a policy at the same time, facilitating the gradual rollout of updates.

This is similar to the `Deployment` and `ReplicaSet` relationship in Kubernetes, where the `Deployment` defines the desired state at a higher level of abstraction,
and the `ReplicaSet` is responsible for managing the current state to align with this desired state.
Additionally, `ReplicaSets` also store the backup of older `Deployment` revisions, enabling rollback to a previous state if needed.

> The `PolicyRevision` will also store the older policy to a maximum of `n` revisions, where `n` is a configurable value.

Reviewer 2: I think the current design only accounts for 1 old revision, not `n` (or I don't understand the specifics on how the rollback and garbage collection happens).

Reviewer 2: Resolving, I understand that we just have several PolicyRevisions, one per revision we want.

The replicas will be watching the `PolicyRevision` CRDs and load the policy in the evaluation environment when the status condition of type `Initialized` is set to `True` and the `enabled` field is set to `true`.
In case of an error, the policy status will be updated, but the Policy Server will continue serving the previous valid policy until the issue is resolved.
This is possible because multiple `PolicyRevisions` can be enabled at the same time.
The Policy Server provides access to current policies through the `/validate` endpoint, incorporating the `generation` number as a URL parameter.
This setup enables the webhook to target a specific policy generation.
For example, the endpoint `/validate/privileged-pods/2` validates requests using the `privileged-pods` policy at generation 2.

#### Policy and PolicyRevision conditions

The `PolicyRevision` CRD will have a status field to store the status of the policy.
The status will be propagated to the `Policy` CRD by the controller, so that the user can monitor the status of the policy without having to access the `PolicyRevision` CRD.

> As the `PolicyRevision` CRD is a namespaced resource, only admin users will have the right permissions to access it.

Reviewer 2: The Policy could have 2 new spec fields that point to the latest PolicyRevision, and the active PolicyRevision. This may simplify garbage collection, general implementation, and user UI on knowing exactly what Policy is being run (settings, etc).

The approach of extending the status condition struct is already used in the Kubernetes codebase,
for example in the [Pod conditions](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/pod-lifecycle/#pod-conditions).

The `PolicyStatusCondition` struct will have the following fields:

| **Field name**         | **Description**                                                                                     |
| ---------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **type**               | Name of the policy condition.                                                                       |
| **status**             | Indicates whether the condition is applicable, with possible values: "True", "False", or "Unknown". |
| **reason**             | Machine-readable reason for the condition's last transition, in UpperCamelCase format.              |
| **message**            | Human-readable message providing details about the last transition.                                 |
| **generation**         | The generation of the `Policy` the status is referring to.                                          |

> | **replica** (optional) | The replica number reporting the status.                                                            |

Reviewer 2: I'm struggling to see the status.replica real usefulness. Also, the replica number may point to a different policy-server in the future. I think it would be better to emit events when we change statuses instead as mentioned later.

See the [Policy and PolicyRevision conditions](#policy-and-policyrevision-conditions) section for more details on how the status conditions will be propagated.

The following `PolicyConditions` will be observed:

- `Scheduled`: The policy was created and is pending to be loaded.
- `Initialized`: The policy was successfully pulled, precompiled and validated by the leader.
- `Ready`: The policy was successfully loaded and is ready to be used. This status will include the replica number.

By using the `reason` field in the status condition, we can provide detailed information in case of an error.
For instance if the leader fails to initialize a policy because of registry error, the following status condition will be set:

```yaml
conditions:
  - type: Initialized
    status: False
    reason: PullError
    message: "Cannot pull the policy from the registry."
    generation: 1
```

#### Policy phase

Similarly to the `Pod` phase, we will introduce a `phase` field in the `Policy` CRD .
The phase of a Policy is a simple, high-level summary of where the policy is in its lifecycle.

Here are the possible values for `phase`:

- `Pending`: The policy was created and is pending to be loaded.

> - `Updating`: The policy was updated and is pending to be loaded.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `Updating`: The policy was `Active` before, has been updated and the updated policy is pending to be loaded. The old revision is still around and being served.
```

- `Active`: The policy was successfully loaded and is ready to be used.
- `Failed`: The policy failed to load.

### Kubernetes Events

The controller will generate [Kubernetes Events](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubernetes-api/cluster-resources/event-v1/) to reflect the status of a policy.
Events will be created during policy status transitions, such as when a new policy is created, updated, successfully loaded, or encounters an error.
This enables users to track the policy's status using `kubectl get events`.

### Rollback

If a policy fails to load, the Policy Server will keep running with the previous valid policy.
The user will be able to rollback to a previous policy version by updating the `Policy` CRD (via a spec field or an annotation, TBD).
The controller will detect the change and use the `PolicyRevision` CRD to update the Policy CRD with the previous configuration.

> ### Garbage Collection

Reviewer 2: We should have in mind also deleting old, N+1, PolicyRevisions.

When a `Policy` is deleted, the controller will also delete all associated `PolicyRevisions`.
Using the `OwnerReference` field is not feasible in this case, as the `PolicyRevision` may reside in a different namespace than the `AdmissionPolicy` or `AdmissionPolicyGroup`,
or it could be versioning a `ClusterAdmissionPolicy` or `ClusterAdmissionPolicyGroup`, which are cluster-scoped resources.

We will also need to implement a garbage collection mechanism to remove old precompiled modules from the shared cache.

> This will prevent the cache from growing indefinitely and consuming unnecessary resources.

Reviewer 3: Considering that we will have a configuration to define the number of revision that will store. Don't the garbage collector need to clean conditions from old generations? I guess there is a limit of the number of conditions allowed, isn't it? 

Even if there is not limits for the conditions count, I believe this is a good  thing to have. It's cleaner and easier to the user to process the data with the want to.

Reviewer: When talking about a Policy (ClusterAdmisionPolicy, AdmissionPolicy,...) the RFC is proposes to keep the conditions of the currently active generation (say N) and, when doing an upgrade, alsothe conditions of the freshly created one (N + 1). When the upgrade is done, the old conditions (N before) are removed, and only the ones about the currently active one are kept (which were named N + 1 before).

## Policy Lifecycle

Given the concepts described above, the policy lifecycle will be as follows:

> ### Policy Creation

Reviewer: Sorry to bring "bad" news, the sequence below is correct, but it doesn't take into account the `phases` of the Policy, which is something that has just been added to the RFC

4. The Kubewarden controller propagates the status condition to the `Policy` CRD.
5. The Policy Server leader pulls the policy from the registry, precompiles the policy, and stores it in the shared cache.
6. The Policy Server leader validates the policy settings.
7. The Policy Server leader changes the status condition of type `Initialized` of the `PolicyRevision` to `True`.
   - If an error occurred in the previous steps, the status condition of type `Initialized` will be set to `False` with the appropriate reason and message.
8. The Kubewarden controller propagates the status condition to the `Policy` CRD.
9. The replica reconciler of all the replicas including the leader loads the policy in the evaluation environment.
10. Every replica will report the status of the policy to the `PolicyRevision` CRD, setting the status condition of type `Ready` to `True`.
    - If an error occurs, the status condition of type `Ready` will be set to `False` with the appropriate reason and message.
11. The `Ready` status is propagated to the `Policy` CRD.

> 12. When all the replicas have set the `Ready` status to true, the Kubewarden controller creates a Webhook configuration pointing to the `PolicyRevision` generation.

Reviewer 2: Can we ensure we are eventually consistent if the replica numbers shuffle, grow or diminish?

    ps_non_leader->>ps_non_leader: host policy and expose it
    note over ps_non_leader, kube: PolicyRevision<br/><br/>status.conditions:<br/>...<br/>- type: Ready<br/>  status: True<br/>  generation: 1<br/>  replica: 0<br/>- type: Ready<br/>  status: True<br/>  generation: 1<br/>  replica: 1
    ps_non_leader->>kube: update PolicyRevision status.conditions
    deactivate ps_non_leader

    activate kw_controller
    kw_controller->>kw_controller: watch PolicyRevision
    note right of kw_controller: ClusterAdmissionPolicy hosted by all PolicyServer instances
    note over kw_controller, kube: ValidatingWebhookConfiguration<br/>endpoint: /validate/cap-foo/1
    kw_controller->>kube: create ValidatingWebhookConfiguration
    note over kw_controller, kube: ClusterAdmissionPolicy<br/><br/>status.conditions:<br/>...<br/>- type: Ready<br/>  status: True<br/>  generation: 1<br/>  replica: 0<br/>- type: Ready<br/>  status: True<br/>  generation: 1<br/>  replica: 1
    kw_controller->>kube: update ClusterAdmissionPolicy status.conditions
    deactivate kw_controller

    activate user
    user-->>kube: observe ClusterAdmissionPolicy status.conditions
```

> ### Policy Update

Reviewer: Same here, can you add some notes about the phases?

3. The new `PolicyRevision` triggers the Policy Server leader reconciler. The Policy Server leader sets the status condition of type `Scheduled` of the `PolicyRevision` to `True`.
4. The Kubewarden controller propagates the `Scheduled` status condition to the `Policy` CRD by adding a new condition with the generation of the `PolicyRevision`.
   The conditions of the previous `PolicyRevision` will be preserved.
5. The Policy Server leader pulls the policy from the registry, precompiles the policy, and stores it in the shared cache.
6. The Policy Server leader validates the policy settings.
7. The Policy Server leader changes the status condition of type `Initialized` of the `PolicyRevision` to `True`.
   - If an error occurred in the previous steps, the status condition of type `Initialized` will be set to `False` with the appropriate reason and message.
8. The Kubewarden controller propagates the status condition to the `Policy` CRD by adding a new condition with the generation of the `PolicyRevision`.

> 9. Thereplica reconciler of all the replicas including the leader loads the policy in the evaluation environment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
9. The replica reconciler of all the replicas including the leader loads the policy in the evaluation environment.
```

10. Every replica will report the status of the policy to the `PolicyRevision` CRD, setting the status condition of type `Ready` to `True`.
    - If an error occurs, the status condition of type `Ready` will be set to `False` with the appropriate reason and message.
11. The `Ready` status is propagated to the `Policy` CRD by adding a new condition with the generation of the `PolicyRevision`.

> 12. When all the replicas have set the `Ready` status to true, the Kubewarden controller creates a Webhook configuration pointing to the `PolicyRevision` generation.

Reviewer: I don't know why, but I always assumed we would updated the webhook configuration. Do we plan instead to have one webhook configuration per policy **and** generation?

Something like `cluster-psp-privileged-g1`, `cluster-psp-privileged-g2`...

Lookin to the next line, I see you use "update" as verb, hence you agree about keeping only 1 webhook configuration per policy.

    - If an error occurred in the previous steps, the controller will not update the Webhook configuration.
13. The controller garbage collects the old `PolicyRevisions` and precompiled modules, keeping only the last `n` revisions.
14. The controller removes the conditions of the old `PolicyRevision` from the `Policy` CRD.

> 15. The policy is now ready to be used.

Reviewer: We are missing the part where someone, I think the kubewarden-controller, changes changes the `PolicyRevision` instance tied to the previous generation of the policy and sets `enabled` to `false`. As a result the policy servers will stop hosting the old generation of the policy (and maybe even drop a wasm module from memory if possible)

When new replicas are created, they start with the currently enabled `PolicyRevisions` and load the required module from the shared cache.
As each new policy server replica starts, the controller updates the status of the policy and policy revisions to show that a new replica has been added.
The `Ready` status for a specific policy on the new replica will be set to `Unknown` until the policy loads successfully.
If the policy fails to load, the policy server will shut down with an error.
This prevents the new replicas from being included in the service endpoints, ensuring no requests are sent to a replica that encountered an error.

### Scaling Down

[Scaling down](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tutorials/stateful-application/basic-stateful-set/#scaling-up) a policy server means reducing the number of replicas in the StatefulSet.
When a replica is removed, the controller will update the status of the policies and policy revisions to reflect the removal.
This may trigger a webhook reconciliation loop if the terminated replica was the only one reporting errors for a specific policy.

# Drawbacks

> [drawbacks]: #drawbacks

Reviewer 2: Running policy-servers outside of a cluster is not possible anymore.
Running a policy-server for raw policies in the cluster is not possible anymore (as the policies are not loaded via Configmap but via PolicyRevisions).

> [drawbacks]: #drawbacks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

- Running policy-servers outside of a cluster is not possible anymore.
- Running a [policy-server for raw policies in the cluster](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/raw-policies#running-a-policy-server-inside-kubernetes-without-the-kubewarden-controller) is not possible anymore (as the policies are not loaded via Configmap but via PolicyRevisions).
- We now enforce an ABI compat on policy-server, as policy-server version is taken into account for Wasm module compatibility.
- The implementation effort is quite big; we need to account for a couple of sprints.
```

Reviewer: > - Running policy-servers outside of a cluster is not possible anymore.

That's not true. We can have a cli flag that disables the controller. We already have a flag that disables the kubernetes integration for that scope (running out side of k8s)

> - Running a [policy-server for raw policies in the cluster](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/raw-policies#running-a-policy-server-inside-kubernetes-without-the-kubewarden-controller) is not possible anymore (as the policies are not loaded via Configmap but via PolicyRevisions).

This is still possible. We don't plan to remove the ability to load policies from a `.yaml` file, this is something that however is going to be allowed only when using raw policies.

To summarize: when the policy-server binary is started with the appropriate flag, the k8s integration are going to be disabled (no context aware policies, no loading policies from the new CRD) and the policies will be loaded from a `.yaml` file. 

> - We now enforce an ABI compat on policy-server, as policy-server version is taken into account for Wasm module compatibility.

We [already have](https://github.com/kubewarden/policy-server/blob/4ec01b4e779aace356b421cced842b6b3be67295/src/evaluation/precompiled_policy.rs#L74-L95) ABI compatibility at the policy-server level, but this is for different reasons and is unrelated with this RFC.
This RFC proposes to store the optimized WASM modules to disk and keep track of the version of policy server that generated them. This is done only to reduce the boot time of the policy server process, there's compatibility issue between policies and policy servers. Everything is handled behind the scenes, without the users or the policy developers being affected by it.

> - The implementation effort is quite big; we need to account for a couple of sprints.

Let's make it months :sweat_smile:

Reviewer 2: Indeed, good points. I'm resolving this as nothing to add :).

<!---
Why should we **not** do this?

  * obscure corner cases
  * will it impact performance?
  * what other parts of the product will be affected?
  * will the solution be hard to maintain in the future?
--->

# Alternatives

[alternatives]: #alternatives

<!---
- What other designs/options have been considered?
- What is the impact of not doing this?
--->

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Do not squash everything into a `PolicyRevision`

The proposal from above squashes all the different high level policy CRDs into a single type called `PolicyRevision`.

Another possible take would be to create ad-hoc `-Revision` CRDs:

- `ClusterAdmissionPolicy` -> `ClusterAdmissionPolicyRevision`
- `AdmissionPolicy` -> `AdmissionPolicyRevision`
- `ClusterAdmissionPolicyGroup` -> `ClusterAdmissionPolicyRevisionGroup`
- `AdmissionPolicyGroup` -> `AdmissionPolicyRevisionGroup`

Pros:
  - The mapping policy <-> revision would be more immediate when using tools like `kubectl`
  - The non-admin users would have access to the namespaced `-Revision` objects

Cons:
  - The number of CRDs would double
  - Underneath all these CRDs would be equal, all of them would have the old policy
    inside of a `RawExtension` attribute. Another alternative would be to NOT use
    the `RawExtension`, and instead copy the actual spec of the actual policy into the
    revision. Basically do something like Deployment -> ReplicaSet -> Pod do
  - Non admin users have access to the Revision objects - see next
  - Users (admin and non) might feel entitled to interact with the Revision resources.
    This could lead to unexpected problems. The revision resources are an internal
    implementation detail of Kubewarden, not meant to be touched by users.

## Have `ClusterPolicyRevision` and `PolicyRevision` CRDs

With the current proposal there's just one revision CRD which is namespaced. The cluster wide Policies are mapped to the namespaced revision too.

As an alternative we could create a cluster wide CRD named `ClusterPolicyRevision` that is used to store the revisions of cluster wide policies.

There doesn't seem to be a great advantage in doing that.

Aside from "better clarity", we could take advantage of Kubernetes GC:
- A ClusterPolicyRevision would be `owned by` its cluster-wide policy (be it a `ClusterAdmissionPolicy` or a `ClusterAdmissionPolicyGroup`)
- The removal of the policy would automatically lead to the removal of its associated ClusterPolicyRevisions

With the current proposal, this cleanup process becomes a burden of the Kubewarden controller.

## Move `PolicyRevision` to the namespace where the policy is defined

Building on top of the previous proposal, the `PolicyRevision` resources could be created inside of the very same namespace where their Policy counterparts live; as opposed to what the RFC states, which is to put everything into the namespace where the Kubewarden controller is running.

Also in this case, the main advantage would be to be able to leverage Kubernetes' GC.

The main disadvantage is that regular users would have access to these resources and might cause issues by managing them.
```

The data field is of type `RawExtension`, allowing it to store any policy type.

The Policy Server replicas will be watching the new `PolicyRevision` CRD directly and it will change the internal state of the evaluation environment when a new policy is created or updated.

#### PolicyServer leader reconciler

A leader election mechanism will be implemented to ensure that only one Policy Server instance is running the leader reconciler at a time.
The leader will be responsible to pull the policies from the registry, validate the policy settings, precompile the policy and store it in a shared cache. See [Shared Policy Cache](#shared-policy-cache) for more details.
We will rely on [Kubernetes Leases](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/leases/) for this functionality, using the same mechanism employed by controllers scaffolded with Kubebuilder to elect a leader.
Since the Policy Server is implemented in Rust, we will use the [kubert](https://docs.rs/kubert/0.22.0/kubert/lease/index.html) crate's lease module for this purpose.

> These features are not provided by the `kube-rs` crate, but kubert is built on top of `kube-rs`, is actively maintained, and is used in production by Linkerd.

Reviewer 4: Other tech mentioned has links so ... maybe?
```suggestion
These features are not provided by the `kube-rs` crate, but kubert is built on top of `kube-rs`, is actively maintained, and is used in production by [Linkerd](https://linkerd.io/).
```

The user will be able to rollback to a previous policy version by updating the `Policy` CRD (via a spec field or an annotation, TBD).
The controller will detect the change and use the `PolicyRevision` CRD to update the Policy CRD with the previous configuration.

### Garbage Collection

When a `Policy` is deleted, the controller will also delete all associated `PolicyRevisions`.
Using the `OwnerReference` field is not feasible in this case, as the `PolicyRevision` may reside in a different namespace than the `AdmissionPolicy` or `AdmissionPolicyGroup`,
or it could be versioning a `ClusterAdmissionPolicy` or `ClusterAdmissionPolicyGroup`, which are cluster-scoped resources.

We will also need to implement a garbage collection mechanism to remove old precompiled modules from the shared cache.
This will prevent the cache from growing indefinitely and consuming unnecessary resources.

## Policy Lifecycle

Given the concepts described above, the policy lifecycle will be as follows:

### Policy Creation

1. The user creates a new `Policy`.
2. The Kubewarden controller sets the phase of the `Policy` to `Pending`.

> 3. The Kubewarden controller creates a new `PolicyRevision` resource with the policy content and sets the `enabled` field to `true`.
>    It also sets the `policyGeneration` field to the value of `metadata.generation` from the `Policy` CRD and adds the `Scheduled` status condition set to `False` to both the `Policy` and `PolicyRevision` CRDs.

Reviewer 4: Shorter sentences usually better.
```suggestion
3. The Kubewarden controller creates a new `PolicyRevision` resource with the policy content and sets the `enabled` field to `true`.
   It also sets the `policyGeneration` field to the value of `metadata.generation` from the `Policy` CRD. It adds the `Scheduled` status condition set to `False` to both the `Policy` and `PolicyRevision` CRDs.
```

     The phase of the `Policy` will be set to `Failed` by the Kubewarden controller.
9. The Kubewarden controller propagates the status condition to the `Policy` CRD.
10. The replica reconciler of all the replicas including the leader loads the policy in the evaluation environment.
11. Every replica will report the status of the policy to the `PolicyRevision` CRD, setting the status condition of type `Ready` to `True`.
    - If an error occurs, the status condition of type `Ready` will be set to `False` with the appropriate reason and message.
      The phase of the `Policy` will be set to `Failed` by the Kubewarden controller.
12. The `Ready` status is propagated to the `Policy` CRD.
13. When all the replicas have set the `Ready` status to true, the Kubewarden controller creates a Webhook configuration pointing to the `PolicyRevision` generation.
    - If an error occurred in the previous steps, the controller will not update the Webhook configuration. The phase of the `Policy` will be set to `Failed`.
14. The phase of the `Policy` will be set to `Active` by the Kubewarden controller.
15. The policy is now ready to be used.

### Sequence diagram

> ```mermaid

Reviewer 4: Nice sequence diagrams!

- A `ClusterPolicyRevision` would be owned by its corresponding cluster-wide policy (`ClusterAdmissionPolicy` or `ClusterAdmissionPolicyGroup`).
- When a policy is deleted, its associated `ClusterPolicyRevision` resources would be automatically cleaned up by Kubernetes, reducing the burden on the Kubewarden controller.

## Place `PolicyRevision` to the namespace where the `Policy` is defined

Building on the previous alternative, `PolicyRevision` resources could be created within the same namespace as their corresponding policies, rather than being placed in the Kubewarden controller’s namespace as originally proposed.
Advantages:

- This approach leverages Kubernetes' GC, making policy cleanup more efficient upon removal.

- When combined with the previous alternative, it also simplifies the rollback process, as the user service account would have the required permissions to access `PolicyRevision` resources.

Disadvantages:

- Regular users would have access to these revision resources, increasing the risk of unintended modifications and potential issues.

# Unresolved questions

[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

> <!---
> - What are the unknowns?
> - What can happen if Murphy's law holds true?
> --->
> 
> ```
> 
> ```
> 
> ```
> 
> ```
> 
> ```
> 
> ```
> 
> ```
> 
> ```

Reviewer 3: Just removing this weird spaces in the rendered file
```suggestion
```

This is will be achieved by refactoring the `EvaluationEnvironment` adding methods to set, update and remove policies.

### The Policy Server acts as a controller

At the time of writing the Policy Server is configured with a ConfigMap that contains all the policies to be loaded.
When a new policy is created, the ConfigMap is updated, and the Policy Server is restarted to load the new policy.

We want to change this behavior to allow the Policy Server to act as a controller that can load new policies without requiring a restart.

#### PolicyRevision CRD

We will introduce a new CRD called `PolicyRevision` to store the state of a policy in relation to the Policy Server replicas.
`PolicyRevisions` are namespaced resources, and they will be created in the same namespace as the controller.

The PolicyRevision will include fields to store the policy content and an `enabled` field to specify whether the policy should be served by the Policy Server.
The `PolicyRevision` will include a `policyGeneration` field to store the generation of the associated `Policy`.
This field will be set to the value of `metadata.generation` from the `Policy` CRD at the time the `PolicyRevision` is created.

> This approach allows the Policy Server to manage serve versions of a policy at the same time, facilitating the gradual rollout of updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach allows the Policy Server to manage multiple generations of a policy at the same time, facilitating the gradual rollout of updates.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: policies.kubewarden.io/v1
kind: ClusterAdmissionPolicy
metadata:
  generation: 1
  name: privileged-pods
spec:
  policyServer: reserved-instance-for-tenant-a
  module: registry://ghcr.io/kubewarden/policies/pod-privileged:v0.2.2
  rules:
    - apiGroups: [""]
      apiVersions: ["v1"]
      resources: ["pods"]
      operations:
        - CREATE
        - UPDATE
  mutating: false
status:
  conditions:
    - type: Pending
      status: True
      reason: PolicyPending
      message: "The policy was created and is pending to be loaded"
```

The controller will create the `PolicyRevision` resource as follows:

```yaml
apiVersion: policies.kubewarden.io/v1
kind: PolicyRevision
metadata:
  name: clusterwide-privileged-pods-6469c6d5f6 # we will use the Policy unique name and a random suffix
  namespace: kubewarden # the namespace of the controller
  labels:
    kubewarden.io/policy-server: reserved-instance-for-tenant-a # this is needed to filter the PolicyRevisions for a specific PolicyServer
spec:
  objectReference:
    apiVersion: policies.kubewarden.io/v1
    kind: ClusterAdmissionPolicy
    name: privileged-pods
  policyGeneration: 1
  enabled: true

>   data: # data will contain the policy content

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  data: # data will contain the policy.spec contents
```

I was also thinking we don't need the whole spec, we could also take the module and the settings. But this would not be true for group policies, where other fields are needed.
Long story short, we can just keep it simple and take the whole `.spec` like you are suggesting

#### PolicyServer leader reconciler

A leader election mechanism will be implemented to ensure that only one Policy Server instance is running the leader reconciler at a time.
The leader will be responsible to pull the policies from the registry, validate the policy settings, precompile the policy and store it in a shared cache. See [Shared Policy Cache](#shared-policy-cache) for more details.
We will rely on [Kubernetes Leases](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/leases/) for this functionality, using the same mechanism employed by controllers scaffolded with Kubebuilder to elect a leader.
Since the Policy Server is implemented in Rust, we will use the [kubert](https://docs.rs/kubert/0.22.0/kubert/lease/index.html) crate's lease module for this purpose.
These features are not provided by the `kube-rs` crate, but kubert is built on top of `kube-rs`, is actively maintained, and is used in production by Linkerd.

After the policy is precompiled, the leader will change the status condition of type `Initialized` of the `PolicyRevision` to `True`.

> This will trigger the replica reconciler to load the policy in the evaluation environment in all the replicas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will trigger the replica reconciler to load the policy in the evaluation environment of all the policy server pods that are part of the StatefulSet.
```

#### Policy Server replica reconciler

All the replicas, including the leader, will be running a reconciliation loop to configure the policies in the evaluation environment.
The replicas will be watching the `PolicyRevision` CRDs and load the policy in the evaluation environment when the status condition of type `Initialized` is set to `True` and the `enabled` field is set to `true`.
In case of an error, the policy status will be updated, but the Policy Server will continue serving the previous valid policy until the issue is resolved.
This is possible because multiple `PolicyRevisions` can be enabled at the same time.
The Policy Server will expose the current policies via the `/validate` endpoint using the `generation` number as a query parameter.
This allows the webhook to be configured to a specific policy generation.

> For instance: `/validate/privileged-pods?generation=2` will validate the request against the `privileged-pods` policy with generation 2.

Reviewer: I don't know if the API server can actually use this query parameter. Regardless of that, I prefer to make the generation number part of the URL, a bit like it's done when versioning public REST APIs.

I propose something like that:

```
/validate/privileged-pods/g2
```

#### Policy and PolicyRevision conditions

The `PolicyRevision` CRD will have a status field to store the status of the policy.
The status will be propagated to the `Policy` CRD by the controller, so that the user can monitor the status of the policy without having to access the `PolicyRevision` CRD.

> Being the `PolicyRevision` CRD a namespaced resource, the user might not have the necessary permissions to access it.

Reviewer: Just to make more evident regular users will not be able to access `PolicyRevision`, and that's fine.

```suggestion
Being the `PolicyRevision` CRD a namespaced resource, only admin users will have the right permissions to access it.
```

#### PolicyServer bootstrap

When the Policy Server starts, it will load the policy from the `PolicyRevision` resources where the `enabled` field is set to `true` if the status condition of type `Initialized` is set to `True`.

> If the `PolicyRevision` is `enabled` but the status condition is not `Initialized`, the Policy Server leader will be in charge of the initlialization process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the `PolicyRevision` is `enabled` but the status condition is not `Initialized`, the Policy Server leader will be in charge of the initialization process.
```

Therefore, we need to store precompiled modules in a path that includes the Policy Server version.
This ensures compatibility when the Policy Server is updated, and the precompiled modules might no longer work with the new version.

> Example: `/cache/ghcr.io/kubewarden/policies/safe-labels/v1.0.0/v1.28.1/module.wasm`.

Reviewer: nitpicking:

```suggestion
Example: `/cache/ghcr.io/kubewarden/policies/safe-labels/v1.0.0/kw-v1.28.1/optimized.wasm`.
```

Reviewer: or:

```suggestion
Example: `/cache/ghcr.io/kubewarden/policies/safe-labels/v1.0.0/optimized-kw-v1.28.1.wasm`.
```

By keeping all the optimized versions of a policy inside of the same folder we could simplify the garbage collector code
